---
title: "A Stranger"
category: "Fiction"
snippet: "I’ve attended weekly church meetings ever since I became a Christian, which, having been born into a Christian family, was essentially from the moment of my birth."
imageUrl: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/356658/pexels-photo-356658.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=1260&h=750&dpr=1"
readingTime: "12 min read"
date: "2025-04-30"
---
I’ve attended weekly church meetings ever since I became a Christian, which, having been born into a Christian family, was essentially from the moment of my birth. One thing I could almost assert from my rich experience was that pictures don’t usually survive occasions like this. At the hymn fest, eyes were fixed on psalms, fingers ran over gilded pages, and even sunlight fell short of the altar. The unspoken law was that cameras were endorsed but not encouraged: such mechanical trespassers in a place of divinity seemed abrupt. He, the photographer, made an exception.

Our serendipitous encounter clung to me, not unlike the way his shutter captured light—fleeting, yet indelible. I recalled it was a crisp October morning. Father John had decreed that everyone wear a symbol of faith. The flock obeyed. Crosses hung from necks as if they were guilty. Teenagers wore T-shirts proclaiming God is Good in block letters, a slogan so ubiquitous it had almost been rendered cliché. Outside around the corner of the church, I saw them spontaneously forming a queue awaiting permission to enter the church. I counted fourteen of them—a silent tally to soothe my impatience—when the man made his presence known. His shirt was the first heresy. It would have given you the impression of the congregation’s uniform with the exact same font and same saccharine white fabric; but instead of Good, his slogan read God is Goose. The absurdity was too irreverent to dismiss yet too clever to rebuke, so sharply it prickled me. I leaned close, my voice hushed to spare us both the spectacle. “A reminder, sir. This isn’t quite… fitting for the occasion.” He arched a brow, his untainted pupils fixated on me. “Why? Geese mate for life. I’d bet I’m more loyal than, say around 75 percent of the parishioners.” The response shocked me, for I hadn’t expected any verbal retaliation against my proper reminder of courtesy on an occasion where people had grown up being fed by the graceful voice of God. I subconsciously corrected the photographer’s misuse of words to preserve the church’s solemn order. I considered reverence a default rule; the voice of my faith whispered into my ear that I had done what I should have done. People had long referred to me as a kind soul, a label too tight like a borrowed sweater, a mismatch. I was born into a lineage of believers, a fourth-generation Christian raised on a steady diet of miracles and mercy. As a child, I never questioned who God was or what He did; my parents’ faith was an heirloom polished by repetition. To them, divinity was a spectacle, while God was the performer. The audience, us, gasped at His blessing over the family’s history of prosperity, hungered for it like crowds crave standing ovations. The old days taught me to clap on cue. Being ordained such a little life bound me to the solemn rhythms of the church, composed of the hymns, the folded hands, and the belief that doubt was a sin best scrubbed clean before Sunday service. The photographer merely smirked, adjusting his collar to highlight the punchline.

“Relax. If God’s up there watching, He’d appreciate the branding refresh.” It was time. Father John invited everyone in. When the flock squeezed in, I noticed Father’s glance at that reckless slogan on the photographer’s T-shirt. He shook his head, palms swiftly covering his mouth. But the volume was just appropriate for me to hear his murmur,

“As usual.”


Everything went as usual. The intrusion of a stranger did not seem an overtly disturbing factor to the crowd, yet I couldn’t stop myself from paying attention to him. Once something was noticed, it may not be unseen. I saw the congregation sitting in the perfect spot to witness his photo-taking. The camera’s mechanical whirring acted as a profanity in the sacred hush, but no one protested. It was only after we understood each other and became closer, about two months after we met, that I was told the truth. The warm, smooth goose-down coats people wore were direct products of his donations, and they had been aware of this. Father John had leaked the message. Hypocrisy, I learned back then, was an unspoken sacrament. On that fated day of my metamorphosis, I witnessed his camera documenting the choreography of devotion. The lens had seen Mrs. Callahan’s performative tears as she clutched her hymnal as well as Santo’s stolen silver cross glinting beneath his threadbare flannel. From the cross, a beam of sunlight was deflected onto the altar like God’s personal spotlight. Afterward, in the rectory’s damp gloom, the photographer sipped sacramental wine from a jelly jar and dissected the hymn fest’s theater. “Notice how the God is Good crowd bolts when the soup pots come out? Odd, isn’t it? You’d think goodness involves more than competitions for food and includes more humility and order.” Standing beside him, Father John sighed. “We meet people where they are. Not where they wish to be.” “And where is the place to begin with? The intersection of apathy and appetite? I doubt they would ever move forward.” Throwing these words out, the photographer left the church. I thought the debate would be endless. It would only come to a termination when one side was completely outspoken. Father John was usually the winner. I couldn’t have known this man better. He is my godfather, the dearest person to me. He never failed to persuade any non-believers that God is the one. I was once beaten. That day, however, was one of the only times I saw him giving up on indoctrination. I asked him why he wouldn’t catch up with the rude man and offer him a well-deserved lesson. He petted my head, then spoke with the tenderest tone,

“It’s fine. He was like this; he is like this; he will always be like this.” He then told me the story of his youth, a time he always called the good old days. At the time, the now pious follower was a close friend to the photographer. Their relationship lasted until the day the photographer swapped seminary for shutter speeds. It was this moment that made liturgical nitpicking outweigh nostalgia, rendering the two a pair of closest strangers. He mentioned how they’d parsed scripture side by side in a seminary library, the occasion where two idealists debated salvation over flickering lamplight. But just as Father John found solace in ritual, the photographer grew restless. “Faith without friction is just folklore,” the photographer once confessed, not long after leaving the priesthood. Then his camera replaced the Bible to take up its duty of guiding him through monasteries and slums. Father recalled the past with abundant concrete details. It was too much for me that I had to extract only the ones I needed to obtain a clear storyline: a midnight argument over a homeless man they’d sheltered, a friction over whether grace required surrender or action. “I’m living by myself.” These were the photographer’s final words. The house was left with only two the following day: young Father John and the homeless man. Any living trace of a conflicting ideology was eliminated. “He took the hard path,” Father John admitted to me, staring at the empty space where his friend’s donation checks still arrived, unsigned. In one or two hours of time, the photographer came back, looking as if he was desperately trying to find something or someone. When he saw me and Father John talking, he approached, bringing up a familiar name. “You must know of Old Tom. He’s 71 years old.

Where he rests is at his journey’s end, but I always see him on the tail end of the line. He is slow, so people make use of this to justify standing in front of him; he is weak. The flock makes use of that to push in before him, to push in to where they wish to be.” Inside my mind was a will that urged me to propose a justification for my fellow believers. But externally, I was speechless. At that dull moment, my faith was accused of being the goose-down coat I wore out of obligation. I envied the photographer’s freedom, the way he slipped extra bread rolls to the single mother Mrs. Callahan, who was secretly referred to as a “welfare parasite” by other members of the community. A poor but tough woman she had always been, at least in my perception. Married to a disabled husband. She had given birth to triplets at the age of 45. However, it was made clear by how people interacted with her that they didn’t want to address her private predicament. I was honestly curious about the photographer’s motive to act the other way. Yesterday I finally had the courage to ask him why he bothered, personally aware that choosing her to display kindness wouldn’t necessarily win him applause, so this couldn’t have been the reason. He responded that he didn’t need a reason to support a living person in need; reputation-wise, he couldn’t care less. He then nodded to Mrs. Callahan’s toddler doodling unicorns in the margins of a psalm sheet. “The next trend will be… God is Unicorn.” It was also yesterday in the pantry line when I watched him slipping a jar of honey into Old Tom’s gnarled hands. I wasn’t the only bystander; a girl sitting next to Tom, the old man with whom no one was willing to spend time, was also watching. They had probably been chatting before we arrived. The widower had been caught stealing votive candles to pawn for arthritis pills. “Teas taste better with it,” the photographer said. Then he turned around and left. Tom stared long at the jar. His knuckles whitened around it. He was silenced, his face unbelieving, as though kindness were a language he’d forgotten how to parse.


By evening, rain washed the streets, driving the flock into the tavern’s nicotine-hazed embrace. Santo held court at the bar, bragging about the silver cross he rightfully “obtained” from Auntie Chen of the nearby Chinese restaurant. The photographer slid onto the stool beside him, ordered two whiskeys, and pushed one toward Santo. “A toast,” he said, clinking their glasses and grinning. “To the divine art of euphemism.” Santo squinted. “You mockin’ me?” “Only the parts that deserve it.” I observed, equal parts stunned and envious, as the photographer navigated the room, serving each addict trembling in the corner a beer on the house, tossing a hundred to the bartender who’d threatened to call the cops. “Preemptive confession,” he called it, though his tone lacked piety. When I asked, again, why he bothered, he lit a cigarette, the smoke forming the shape of a question mark between us. “The church charges admission for mercy. I prefer the pay-what-you-can method.” It is Monday today. The photographer leaves, off to either document the next Buddhist soup kitchen or Hindu hymn ritual: it doesn’t need to be specified. But upon departure, he places behind the relic a tarnished silver dollar. In God We Trust has eroded to a spectral breath, left beside the chalice like a silent dare. Santo finds it first, pawning it along with the stolen silver cross for an outworn golden cross, and declares it 'the holiest trade since Judas.’ I record the scene in my mind. In the evening, as the rain continues to tap at the stained glass, I notice the girl from the pantry yesterday—one of the only three who were not in the God is Good shirt—sharing her pudding cup with the feral cat Mrs. Callahan has kicked off the steps. No hymns accompany the act. No coins clink. She is in a plain gray sweater, her sleeves fray at the wrists. When the cat hesitates, she waits still as stone. Her patience is a quiet rebuke to the hymn fest’s clamor. The pudding split evenly. The girl licks her fingers clean, then tucks the empty cup into her pocket like a secret. God is Goose lingers again on my mind. I think of the photographer’s smirk, the absurd slogan on the center of his shirt, and the way he’d pressed honey into Old Tom’s hands without sermonizing. “Goodness includes more humility and order,” he once said, snapping a photo of Santo’s pawned silver cross. “It’s the thing you do when no one’s keeping the score.” The girl stands, brushing dirt from her knees, and glances at the church. For a moment, her vision intersected with mine: not defiant, not pious, just present. Then she turns around and leaves. The cat stares long at the ground, then trotting at her heels like a disciple. I run full throttle, trying to chase her and offer my umbrella. It is raining cats and dogs. Neither divine light nor the sound of the church bell is either visible or audible. It’s not one of those hopeful scenes in books. But I know, from the depths of my mind, that very soon the rainbow will emerge, granting the girl the most beautiful crown she deserves. With her as the goddess, I bet the photographer would have called it a start. My mission, at this point, is to ensure that the seed of hope is retained, to the day it ripens.
