---
title: "An ethical approach on the non-viability of animal testing"
category: "Essay"
snippet: "The E.P.A."
imageUrl: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/8533140/pexels-photo-8533140.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=1260&h=750&dpr=1"
readingTime: "21 min read"
---
The E.P.A. Administrator Andrew Wheeler proposed the agency plans to reduce the number of studies that involve mammal testing by 30 percent by 2025 and to eliminate the studies entirely by 2035. This public denouncement of animal testing gave rise to respective concerns over the issue of animal ethics. Is animal testing morally permissible? Should, and could it be justified? Those are the key argument that I will argue about in this essay.

To better address the problem, animal testing as the central topic must be defined. It is the authorized pharmacy examination to test out medical effects on living beings besides humans. To the extent of political and legislative appropriateness, animal testing is feasible due to the franchised acknowledgment of governments. Up to the current point of history, only 42 countries out of the 193 have passed laws to limit or ban cosmetic animal testing. In areas such as China and Japan, animal testing is still regarded as the most prevalent means to test for the effect of newly invented medicines.

The important point to talk about in the discussion of whether animal testing is justified falls into the category of whether animal testing is ethically applicable. Throughout history, many philosophers had argued against the homogeneity of animals and humans, demanding to draw a clear distinction between humans and animals. For Aristotle, his dualist perspective——a belief that living matters are constituted of two components, minds, and body, material and immaterial——shifts him into arguing about the absence of a “rational soul” in animals (Lehewych, 2019). Within humans and animals is a hierarchy. Descartes furthers this claim with the belief that non-human animals were “insentient” machines. He insisted that animals lack the two components of an immaterial soul, namely thoughts and minds. Humans have subjective experiences because of those immaterial souls inhering from their physical bodies. Animals do not speak or philosophize, and so there are no signs to suggest that they are being inhabited by rational souls, thus, animals, in essence, are complex physical machines without experience, thus they should be regarded as no different from cuckoo clocks or watches. (Kaldas, 2015) In this context, animals being no different from lifeless objects could be used to carry out experiments.

On the contrary, there are philosophers who would back the idea of ‘animal rights.’ Peter Singer, professor of bioethics at Princeton and the University of Melbourne, calls for wide respect for animal rights in the controversial book Animal Liberation. He approached the problem with an unusual means, abandoning the conventional struggle if animals can reason or talk, ‘but can they suffer?’ Said singer. He introduced a religious perspective to view this question, bringing up the Bible to cite his standpoint. The Bible stipulated that God grants humans dominion over animals. The dominion, which is commonly understood as the right to ‘do as we(humans) will’, should be interpreted otherwise as responsible stewardship. (Schacter, 2013) Irrespective of animal rationality, the case of animal consciousness needs also to be brought into the discussion of ethics in animal testing. The evidence to justify an integral animal interest is supported by the anatomical, physiological, and behavioral similarities between humans and animals. “We are animals,” Singer said, citing Darwin’s theory of evolution. With this proclamation, Singer asserts that animals’ interests should be given equal weight to those of humans. Whilst humans have a concern over the potential side effect of certain chemicals, animals, which share the same rights as humans, are being treated as test subjects. According to Singer’s theory, animal testing is neither permissible nor morally justified, as if the tests can be applied to animals, the measures should as well be adopted by human test subjects.

To the extent of my thoughts on animal testing, I believe there is every reason for it to be banned, and I do hold a similar view on this issue with Singer. But Peter Singer avoids the point that Aristotle and Descartes were making on how animals should not be treated as humans because of an immaterial difference, and he goes on to argue that animals deserve equal rights as humans regardless of the difference. The lack of direct confrontation of thoughts is the limitation of Singer’s argument. More logical disapproval of Aristotle and Descartes’s theory is to directly argue against their theory of an immaterial soul is the source of subjective experience. The advancement in biology could influence modern readers of Descartes to critique his pseudo-proposition of some non-physical entity, instead, they are more likely to hold the belief that experiences arise from the brain. The contemporary physiological study of the human and animal brains indicates a high level of structural similarity, proving the likelihood of animals’ exposure to subjective experiences, just like humans, whereas this characteristic has previously been considered ‘exclusive’ to humans. If this argument is embraced, then we cannot conduct inhumane chemical tests that could result in lethal consequences on animals with total insouciance as we might scrap an old lamp or a set of headphones that lack subjectivity for sure.

Some of the stronger criticism of Descartes’ perspective on animals include that from one of his younger contemporary counterparts. Ralph Cudworth (1617-1688), an Anglican theologian, and a keen Classicist argued that thought that Descartes’ view of animals as mindless machines was implausible. He argued instead that animals also have a soul, therefore raising a forthright challenge to Descartes. As Cudworth put it, anyone who looked at animal behavior which he claimed to be of incredible variety and complexity and decided that it is all merely physical mechanism “will never be able clearly to defend the incorporeity and immortality of human souls” (Cudworth,1678). To put it bluntly, if animals carry out their acts purely due to their physical makeup, human behaviors are probably driven the same way. If Descartes deemed animal behaviors as resulting from nothing but ‘blood and brains’, humans would have fallen under the same category as animals under his definition.

Cudworth’s argument pinpoints the weakness of Descartes’s standpoint on the issue. According to him, Descartes’ mistake was that his conception of the soul was too narrow.

Animals do not have to prove their capacity for a soul by speaking or thinking reflectively; rather, their sophisticated surviving mechanisms could have been the result of nothing else but a soul. A dualist counterattack seems to persuade in the context, yet, it has a bias, one that assumes the presence of souls as the source of conscious minds due to the orthodox assumption in his era. Also, animal testing had yet to become prevalent. Given the context, Cudworth’s argument also has its limitation. Instead of using the statement that neither humans nor animals have a soul, and they are biologically alike, he tried to show that animals also have a soul; but Cudworth did commit to bridging Descartes’ radical gap between humans and animals. He believed that although animals do have a soul, it is less perfect and less conscious than a human soul. Given its existence, we are given more moral responsibilities towards animals than we are towards soulless, mindless objects. There is a fundamental difference between humans and animals, as the souls of the latter are in less complex, less developed forms. Cudworth admitted the distinction but put forward the idea that the special completeness of human souls does not entail the worthlessness of animal ones. Following his definition of animal rights, animal testing which does harm to animals is an act of demolishing our responsibilities owing to them. Thus, it is not morally permissible.

Philosophers hold contradicting positions on the issue of animal rights, and some of the deeper implications of the question extend to modern society, in the form of the discussion of whether animal testing should be banned. Ideas from an earlier age commonly point to the saying that animals are inferior to humans because they lack a soul, but amongst them, opposing voices exist. Cudworth rejected the claim made by Descartes and Aristotle. He criticized their view from a dualist perspective, arguing that animals have a soul. Being less than a human doesn’t grant the latter a privilege to exert a negative influence on the vulnerable group. Modern philosophers like Singer cut into the problem with a scientific prerequisite. They argue that with the structural similarities between humans and animals, the two should share equal interests. Animal rights ought not to be infringed with malignant chemical tests. Personally, I believe that animal testing is never justified. As a student of biology and philosophy, I place animal ethics at the same height as human ethics. I recognized how humans evolve from animals but maintain an underlying connection with them. We possess many common features, including the capacity for emotion, the ability to form a social web, and the 7 basic criteria of living beings. Given all that, we should not carry out any chemical tests on animals. They are suffering, being more or less close to them, I can tell.

Works Cited

Cudworth, R. (1678) “The True Intellectual System of the Universe and the Presocratic Philosophers.” Catherine Rowett.

Kaldas, S. (2015) Descartes versus Cudworth on the moral worth of animals, Philosophy Now: a magazine of ideas. Available at: https://philosophynow.org/issues/108/Descartes_versus_Cudworth_On_The_Moral_Worth_of_Animals (Accessed: October 4, 2022).

Lehewych, D. (2019) Aristotle and Descartes on animals, Medium. Medium. Available at: https://daniellehewych.medium.com/aristotle-and-descartes-on-animals-a73c8a27d0bf (Accessed: October 4, 2022).

Schacter, J.R. (2013) Peter Singer advocates for Animal Rights: News: The Harvard Crimson, News | The Harvard Crimson. Available at: https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2013/11/10/peter-singer-advocates-for-animal-rights/ (Accessed: October 4, 2022).

In what sense are you the same person today that you were when you were ten?

A few days ago, my foot was immersed in the Yangtze River. This reminds me of stepping into the same location when I was ten. I could recall every detail of my previous trip. If I remember the past event as clearly as that, does it mean that I have been the exact same person through these years? The question that delves into the consistency of human identity is known as the issue of the enduring self. One solution proposed by Plato and Descartes utilizes the construct of the soul; but as its legitimacy becomes increasingly questioned, the range of resolutions has been shifted to the role identity plays in scientific and psychological contexts. This change is led by John Locke who rejected the Neo-Platonist epistemology with his claim that we have no experience of the substances (Uzgalis). The aforementioned approaches can be categorized as broadly individualistic approaches to personal identity. Its framework focuses on an essence that defines an individual’s unique identity, which could be around the body, the soul, or psychological continuity (Shoemaker). I personally prefer looking at the question with Locke’s theory, and it indicates that I have remained the same person since ten.

In his An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Locke specifies that the term “person” refers to a particular type of self-reflective consciousness (Gordon-Roth). Only the persons, as opposed to the biological humans defined by their bodies, possess identity. The personal self is “a thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and places”, and personal identity is simply “the sameness of a rational being” (Piccirillo). One has the same personal identity so long as one is the same self. Locke lays out that “it is [consciousness] which makes everyone to be what he calls self” (Locke 246). In his view, consciousness is an essential part of the thinking process, thus a key condition of self. It is what makes possible our belief that we are the same identity over time and space. Locke makes a further distinction between the identity of a material substance and the identity of a living thing. Matter is a mass of atoms that retains its identity if the number of atoms is quantitatively constant; but living things never cease to gain or lose matter, making their way of retaining identity distinct (Hamid). To remain the same person has nothing to do with remaining the same substance. The enduring nature of personal identity arises from its consciousness of present thoughts and actions that the self is conceived, and it is only through the continuous link of memory that the self “can be extended backward to any past action or thought, so far reaches the identity of that person” (Locke 246). Consciousness enables the capacity to form and retain memories. The alternation or loss of memory, according to Locke, is the indication of a loss of identity (Piccirillo). Leibniz, a proponent of Locke’s theory, demonstrates the point in an example where even if one can choose to become the King of China at the cost of amnesia, an “individual has no reason to desire [this outcome] for without the memory of what one had been it would not be in any way desirable” (Leibniz 145). My consciousness which has been the same since I possess memories of the past at the age of 17 gives me a consistency in identity. This means that I have remained the same person since ten.

We could argue, however, that Locke’s criterion is too demanding. I would have lost certain pieces of memory other than the trip to the Yangtze River as time lapsed. But to fulfill Locke’s psychological continuity, one must retain every memory that is theirs. Nothing can be forgotten. Thomas Reid poses an objection to Locke’s account of identity by stating that “I might have done it, though I did not remember it” (Reid 110). He questions the legitimacy of treating

memory as a mere extension of consciousness and that all memories must stay integral to constitute one’s identity. This objection can be illustrated through the boy–soldier-general thought experiment. A boy, a soldier, and a general are the same person of different ages. The general remembers his experience as a soldier, but he is too old to recall that of the boy. Assume that the boy is A, the soldier is B, and the general is C. According to this scenario, C is B and B is A. Due to the transitive nature of identity, C is thus A. Yet, because C cannot remember his experience as A, Locke’s theory would suggest that C is not A: a counterintuitive conclusion. To address this problem, Derek Parfit proposes a more accommodating criterion in which weaker connections that involve breakage are still valid to ensure psychological continuity if the subject possesses “overlapping memory chains” (Parfit 199). Applying Parfit’s criterion to the boy- soldier-general example, even if C remembers his experience as B not A, as long as he knows when he is B he remembers what happened to him as A, the identity is continuous. In my case, even as I lose some memories about 7 years ago, I will still be the same person for I remember what had happened in the previous three years, and back then I should have a clearer idea of the past. The connectedness of memory ensures that my identity has remained consistent.

But is this the truth? Am I the same person because I hold memories of the past? I might as well not be if viewing from an alternative perspective. Biologically, the human body regenerates over time (Spalding et al.). I have been through undeniable physical changes since I last visited the river.

As Eric T. Olson defines, the bodily criterion of personal identity states that “[humans] are [their] bodies, or at any rate that our identity over time consists in the identity of our bodies”

(Olson 143). The position argues that spatial-physical continuity of the body must be present for identity to persist between different points in time. The same person is thus the same biological object over time. Brian Garrett expressed the argument in the following manner: “Person A at time t1 is identical to person B at time t2 if and only if A and B have the same body” (Garrett 10).

As a teenager, however, it is hard to argue that my body has remained “the same” since I was a ten-year-old teen. Common knowledge suggests that the human body completely regenerates over a seven-year span (Spalding et al.). This progressive replacement suggests that I am a new person every 7 years. The changes in components of my body lead to a difference in my qualitative identity demanding “the exact similarity” in terms of my appearance (“personal identity”). I look very different at 17 compared to how I looked at 10. In this regard, I am a different person.

The bodily criterion responds by claiming that changes are acceptable provided that they are not sudden or comprehensive. Stable and continuous changes are sufficient to determine continuity (Le Nezet 334). My body underwent subtle and gradual changes that didn’t happen overnight. These physiological variations exhibit temporal consecutiveness, which demonstrates that my physical identity may also be continuous despite the many changes to it.

One problem of the bodily criterion lies in the determination of a sufficient standard of continuity. What percentage limit is there that when a person touches upon would prevent them from being considered the original entity? A quantitative value cannot be reasonably assigned,

which renders the assessment inconclusive. On the other hand, the soul theory avoids this limitation by adopting a non-quantitative approach to identity.

The problem of personal identity was initially solved by the presumed existence of the soul. Platonic dualism as expressed in Phaedo claims that the soul is to remain aloof from the body so that even when the body perishes, the immaterial soul continues to exist. Due to its indestructibility, the soul is considered the location of identity (Le Nezet 338). Descartes furthers Plato's argument and concludes with his methodology of radical doubt that “I was a substance; the whole essence or nature of which is to think [...] nor does [my existence] depend on any material thing.” He rejects the bodily criterion in claiming that “[I am] the soul” and is “entirely distinct from the body” (Descartes 23). Through negating the role of the body in defining personal identity and assuming the soul, Descartes’ theory purposes that identity is permanent and confirms the conclusion that I am always the same person regardless of temporal changes.

A real concern with the soul theory, however, lies in determining if the soul exists. The unchangeability of the soul offers a sound answer to the issue of identity, yet it is never possible to find evidence in a metaphysical reality that proves the presence of a non-material substance. This renders the soul theory untenable.

At this point, I would argue that Locke’s theory is the most effective in addressing the provided question. Locke believes that one could use his own experience and go through introspection to gain insight into the self. The term introspection is defined as the “perception of the operations of our own mind within us” (Locke 87). In other words, Locke is demanding individuals to derive

the answer by looking inside themselves. This is more relevant to the question that focuses on why I am the same person now as I am at ten, which only seems reasonable to be tackled from a first-person perspective. Contrarily to it is the bodily criterion. It attempts to resolve the issue of identity through objective scientific observations and ignores the subjective experience that is central to the question. As a result, it may only reach a general conclusion on how identity and its continuity should be determined for everyone, not just me. The other problem with both the bodily criterion and soul theory is, according to Locke, the substantial nature of their arguments. Locke takes thought, the foundation of consciousness and thus identity, to be immaterial. He contends that the immaterial cannot be reduced to the material (Gordon-Roth). Locke’s psychological continuity, unlike the other two theories, focus on both the immaterial and non- substantial aspect of personal identity. In solving the evident problems of the body and soul theories by drawing focus to the inner qualities of my own being and negating the attempt to explain the immaterial identity in terms of the body and the soul which are both substances, Locke’s view becomes the most sensical solution to me.

Ultimately, the answer to whether I am the same person today as I was at ten is that I am. This conclusion is drawn primarily from Locke’s psychological continuity framework stipulating that consciousness is the center of selfness and my memory that connects the past to the present ensures the endurability of my personal identity. While Locke’s theory is sometimes taken as overly demanding, it is refined by Parfit who relaxes the standard of continuity. Other schools of thought also provide insights into the question. The bodily criterion argues that I have undergone changes that alter my qualitative identity, pointing out a potential alternative view to the one offered by Locke; yet the gradualness of biological changes still confirms the consecutiveness of

my identity. The soul theory, on the other hand, focuses on using non-material elements to determine identity. It determines that age which bothers only with human biology but not the soul does not change one’s identity. These two theories encounter limitations in application: the physical criterion is rejected by the soul theorists; the presence of the soul is denied for the lack of proof regarding its existence. I would argue that Locke’s theory is a superior solution to the provided question for it pays more attention to me as a unique individual and counters identity theories that focus exclusively on the substantial aspects of identity.

Works Cited

Descartes, René. "Part IV." Discourse on Method and Meditations, by René Descartes et al., Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1960.

Fox, Michael Allen. "A New Look At Personal Identity." Philosophy Now, no. 62, 2007.

Garrett, Brian. Personal Identity and Self-consciousness. London, Routledge, 1998.

Gordon-Roth, Jessica. "Locke on Personal Identity." Edited by Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University Center for the Study of Language and Information, 11 Feb. 2019, plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2020/entries/locke-personal- identity/. Accessed 10 July 2023.

Hamid, Nabil. "Locke and Hume on Personal Identity: Who is right?" LinkedIn, 2 Jan. 2020, www.linkedin.com/pulse/locke-hume-personal-identity-who-right-nabil-hamid-pmp-/. Accessed 10 July 2023.

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Discourse on Metaphysics. Manchester, Manchester UP, 1953.
Le Nezet, Nancy. Philosophy: Being Human: Course Companion. Oxford, Oxford Univ. Press,

2014.

Locke, John. Of Identity and Diversity. New York City, Dover Publications, 1959. Book II of An Essay concerning Human Understanding.

Olson, Eric T. The Human Animal: Personal Identity without Psychology. New York City, Oxford UP, 1997.

Parfit, Derek. Personal Identity. Edited by John Perry, 2nd ed., Berkeley, U of California P, 2008.

Piccirillo, Ryan A. "The Lockean Memory Theory of Personal Identity: Definition, Objection, Response." Inquiries Journal/Student Pulse 2.08 (2010). http://www.inquiriesjournal.com/a?id=1683

Reid, Thomas. "Of Identity." Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, by Reid, edited by John Perry, Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press, 2008.

Shoemaker, David. "Personal Identity and Ethics." Edited by Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University, 11 Feb. 2019, plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2021/entries/identity-ethics/. Accessed 10 July 2023.

Spalding, Kirsty L et al. “Retrospective birth dating of cells in humans.” Cell vol. 122,1 (2005): 133-43. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.028

Uzgalis, William. "John Locke." Edited by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University, 7 July 2022, plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2022/entries/locke/. Accessed 10 July 2023.

Vance, Chad. "Personal Identity." Chad Vance, U of Colorado Boulder, rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil201/identity.pdf. Accessed 10 July 2023.
