---
title: "O Writing My Writing!"
category: "Essay"
snippet: "I have thought of my creative works as not subjected to any external critiques, as they are “perfect”. Of course, that is a joke."
imageUrl: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/5864226/pexels-photo-5864226.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=1260&h=750&dpr=1"
readingTime: "4 min read"
date: "2025-05-01"
---
I have thought of my creative works as not subjected to any external critiques, as they are “perfect”. Of course, that is a joke. But the harsh reality was that nobody was there to offer their eyes, time, and reflections regarding my work. I lived in a claustrophobic literary space before; it was just me and the works. Though I hoped for the presence of a third party in the review process, there was none. People were busy with their work, and evaluating one another’s creativity is nothing else but an altruistic act; yet, as we know, altruism exists no longer in 2025. So, I enrolled in the creative writing class, hoping to learn more about writing, and hoping less to receive others’ sincere feedback, as I anticipated they would just be skimming through the lines and reaching a crude conclusion that the writing is good, mediocre, or bad. But the reality is so different from what I had expected. Here, the writers form a little community, and within the community, they help improve each other’s writing mutually, exchanging good ideas for improvement and seeking no reward. I went through two extended workshops over the semester, and both sessions benefitted me significantly. My work was critiqued and annotated. People would point out what specifically I excelled at and what areas of improvement were available. I have not been exposed much to receiving ideas from others in discourse-form workshops; hence, I was initially vulnerable to accepting criticisms. Indeed, I did not think my work was perfect, but since my writing has neither been appreciated nor judged, I had a self-activated protection mechanism that would resist any opposing voices. Nevertheless, through my

Self-Reflection increasing exposure to workshop activities, I was gradually able to stretch myself more to accept “this is not ideal.” I hold the full belief that others in the class felt the same as I do in the sense that they would fear but be excited about others’ challenges, so when I am commenting, I won’t refrain from talking about what parts could have been done better. Of course, with gentle and polite language. That being said, when a work has more areas for improvement, I would respond to it more attentively, especially when the storyline is unclear. This, I think, would disturb the readers’ overall reading experience. There are some really good works, like Paige’s workshop, that, if the timeline issue is resolved, will be amazing. To work with fewer major issues, I would offer feedback on the showing versus telling side. I am aware that there is never perfect writing; there is only better writing. Another thing I was proud of was my improvement in team cooperation during presentations. Prior to coming to Emory, I had never worked with any native speakers in delivering group presentations. For the majority of the time, I would take up the responsibility of being the sole talker. However, the experience I had with the presentation we did during the semester educated me that all the students here at Emory are capable and that the presentation does not have to be my solo show anymore. I could rely on the others. If there were another chance, I am confident that my group and I would do better, this time with a more balanced time division. I am particularly proud of my workshop story. I think it is a well-told, character-driven writing. I brought to life some key characters, like the narrator, the photographer, and the people at the church. I am even more thrilled about the fact that people offered me so many valid suggestions regarding how I could improve the story. Three or four of these I have adopted in the

Self-Reflection revision process. Those are things I could not have come up with by myself. I call my workshop story a collective effort. My fellow students’ contribution is what I am also extremely proud of. I listened to them and have been working on the clarification of character relationships, a more specific ending, and better logic consistency. Anyway, thank you to all my fellow students who worked with me over the semester. I guess I will call this the end and the conclusion of my reflection. Thank you, Professor Cooper, for being a sharp and smart instructor. My creative writing skills have improved dramatically over the semester. I would for sure consider taking the course down the path of my future academic career.
