---
title: "The immortals and the rising stars"
category: "Essay"
snippet: "Let’s begin – today, I want to share a personal experience with you all… or does it only apply to me? This feels like a scene that many of my peers might all have seen before."
imageUrl: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/590493/pexels-photo-590493.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=1260&h=750&dpr=1"
readingTime: "8 min read"
---
Let’s begin – today, I want to share a personal experience with you all… or does it only apply to me? This feels like a scene that many of my peers might all have seen before. For countless times, I have been asked the questions, “what major do you want to study in college? What’s your dream job? Do you think the future would be heavily based on technology?” Very few of us have a clear answer, but still, we’re asked. My response has always been the same: I love literature and philosophy and I’d like to choose between the two for a major, and after graduation, I’d want to work in a relevant field. I’ve long told my mum that becoming an author is my greatest ambition, and it seems reachable as several graduates from our school have managed this.

However, my mum says this dream is too aspirational for me: it’s unlikely that I’d find a job with a decent salary in the philosophy or literature field, and she wants me to be more proactive in the science subjects. So, I tried – from 8 in the morning to 6 in the evening, I worked incessantly to master biology, mathematics, and chemistry. My timetable was full to the brim as I saw it as my sworn duty to my mum to work as hard as I could. Still, I always felt guilty, as there was always someone who seemed more hardworking than me, someone who was achieving more. By the end of each day, my head was dizzy, my vision blurred, my senses dull; I was full of despair and self-doubt. I’d never be able to work hard enough.

So, I’d like to introduce the point I really want to speak about today – not a vague personal experience or a dream job, but the social pressure towards hard work. Too often, I’m told that due to my age and the general reality of our era that’s full of competitions, I must be constantly busy. The problem there is, what if our effort never pays off? What if we’re just left exhausted and miserable – how are we to have the energy to carry on such an impossible schedule when motivation runs dry? Persevere, I am told, we’re told, you must persevere.

We misunderstand the nature of perseverance. We admire hard working individuals, but when we see people who are struggling and desperately trying to keep up, we see them as “lacking in will power”. This is fundamentally wrong. Quoting Nietzsche, the “will to power” in the “unexhausted procreative will of life”. It’s the life force that comes from our hearts, founded in passion. It is what fuels us in our journey to discover meaning, not just blindly holding onto something we dislike in the name of achievement. Sociology tells us that between you and success lays 10,000 hours – this theory can be applied to those who possess true passion. Michael Jordan, Jack Ma, Tom Brady… they’ve all surpassed this ten-thousand-hour milestone because they care, they enjoy what they’re doing, they have “the will to power”.

By contrast, holding onto something just for the sake of it for eight hours a day is plain misery. We mistakenly perceive “will power” as the ability to function under suffering, and this misconception, especially in China, has caused a serious social issue. 40 million children are playing piano, but among them, nearly 50% fail to spend 30 minutes a day practicing, and 20% will give up after three years of guilt and self-doubt and relentless works because something hinders them to quit earlier. I know chemistry is not my instrument, I feel absolutely indifferent toward it, and yet I continued to extensively study it for years, fearing to admit to myself and my parents a fact that I already knew, that it dislikes me, and nor do I fit it. It is that fear towards giving up that stops me from more effectively allocating my time.

This leads onto my second point: we should work hard, but we need to think more carefully about where we spend our effort.

I understand where my mum’s viewpoint comes from, her repeated assertions that I should put my focus on the sciences because that’s where the money lies is sincere. She’s right in thinking that a career in philosophy is limited, it’s more or less a metaphysical title in her perception. That I don’t agree. My mum also said that I have to try, no matter if I care about it or not, because my life must be centered on “useful knowledge”. I can’t accept this view though. Literature and philosophy have been the harbingers of intelligence for thousands of years, distinguishing our intellect from that of animals. The modern era was built heavily upon technology and innovation, I admit, but that stands upon pillars of literature – it’s that which my mum fails to see. All the imaginations that lead us toward to a brighter future. That is reason number one. Plus, I was never good in statistical subjects.

I tried to compromise. I told her, “I’ve attempted to love math and science, but I’ve tried and tried and reaped no rewards. I’m just not talented enough.” I almost cried when shouting those words out, feeling the omnipresent pressure crushing in on me, demanding the perfect GPA in every subject. It was the first time I really visualized that gap, the difference between those who strived for the best grades and those who were genuinely talented in a subject. Later, when I discovered my interest in literature and philosophy, I was more than capable of producing beautiful, insightful work of high quality. I never struggled when penning short novels, unlike those countless nights I’d spent studying math to no avail. My mum maintained that if I worked hard enough, I’d break through that invisible barrier, but I believe people are different and therefore have fields best suited to them. To force on something will never give you a good result. As young people, we dream of a life that has value, something that makes our spirits soar every day, somewhere we truly belong. If we waste our energy on trying to force talent to where there is none, we have squandered our progress.

My third point, also the last point of the speech, is that we need to face squarely the idea of giving up. Why don’t we, as a society, encourage students to find their true paths, somewhere they can thrive and grow, and allow them to say goodbye to the wrong routines?

I gave a different response to my mum the last time she asked those same questions. We’re always given these big themes to grapple with, dreams versus reality, our job and our future, talent versus interest. I said, if 81% of students change their major in college and 29% of young workers want a career change, does that mean we’re all not hardworking enough? Have we all failed to persevere? No.

We are all wonderful humans, but different and complex in our own way. We are that complicated beings because we change biologically and mentally everyday. It’s okay to know when something is just ‘not your thing’ and change your mind. I see change as the norm, I see change as progress. I see giving up as an essential component of discovering what truly matters.

Our fear of giving up has to end, we need to be able to tell our families that our talents lie elsewhere – maybe science is not the path for me, but there’s a subject out there I really excel at. In that subject, I found the ‘will to power’. I’d never be able to discover that without finding it within myself to say no when being pushed towards what holds no future for us. See, give up works! Our parents might want to argue for the opposite. Trust me, they want the best for us, sometimes wanting that so badly. We cannot let that anxiety govern our future. We need to be in charge of it. To stand against the universal problem of social pressure and parents’ mandate of our prospect, we have to step forward and put belief and will to power into our dreams, explain to them why the dreams are valuable and why we’re making the decisions we make. The best advocate for us is ourselves, and if we want to be like those successful people who made positive changes to the society, we need to get behind our own wants and needs 100%.
