---
title: "Workshop Reflection"
category: "Essay"
snippet: "Two years ago, I picked up the habit of dedicating a piece of writing to my late friend, Kevin."
imageUrl: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/6143818/pexels-photo-6143818.jpeg?auto=compress&cs=tinysrgb&w=1260&h=750&dpr=1"
readingTime: "11 min read"
date: "2025-12-14"
---
Two years ago, I picked up the habit of dedicating a piece of writing to my late friend, Kevin. I do not like to face past trauma, but it is an inevitable part of remembering someone who meant so much to me. He used to teach me not to escape from predicaments; you face them. I am a literature student; my pen is my weapon, my confrontation of misfortune. This year, with my first workshop story due around the same time, I figured I would combine the tasks and make the best of it. That push is what led me to create “Mr. Lazarus the Obscure.”

Anyone with a background in Christianity may easily be intrigued by this title. “The Obscure” comes from the book Jude the Obscure, recommended by my high school English teacher; “Mr. Lazarus” refers to the famous Lazarus of Bethany, who was resurrected by Jesus through divine power. I already discussed his loss and my feelings about it in last year’s memoir; this year, I determined to present a more hopeful piece, at least initially, to not only my peers in the creative writing class but also my friends. With that as the defining tone, the theme of the writing was set: his resurrection back to life.

I finished the first part of the writing in less than one day. That section was adopted in my revised and half-completed version of the story, which I handed in as workshop one in class. That was the first half of the story, beginning when “I” sensed the peculiarity in the air and was told by Bruce that Kevin had come back to life; it ends at the church scene when he, wrapped gently by “lights of seven colors,” rises from the coffin in front of everyone. At that point, I assume I was not talking about a symbolic resurrection, nor was it a fake resurrection (with someone being an imposter). It was a miracle. He had actually been resurrected. How? I did not intend to explain, for that would have been impossible: if I could somehow justify resurrection, I might as well perform it.

But then, in my three-hundred-level English class about photography, I came across a work that utterly changed my mind (sorry that it was not from one of this class’s readings, but I assume everything I read counts, regardless of its origin). It is called Maud-Evelyn, and it introduced one of the weirdest themes I have seen. The story’s heroine, Maud-Evelyn, is dead from the start. She is a young girl who passed away a few years ago. All that is left of her is a picture. At this point, you may ask: how are you supposed to write a story about her? Well, here is what Henry James did: he invented a character named Marmaduke, who met the Dedricks, the girl’s parents. They persuaded him to pretend to be the girl’s husband, living in a house where Maud-Evelyn used to live now turned into a temple of grief, a shrine to her. For every bit of life, they pretended that the daughter was still there, and she kept growing up. Marmaduke spread the message so that some of his most intimate friends accepted that there was such a girl, and that she was Marmaduke’s wife. Even after the truth is revealed, it does not matter. A woman who loved Marmaduke chooses to remain a widow, knowing that Maud-Evelyn is deceased, and Marmaduke is married to a dead girl. The other people who heard the news think it does not matter: in their mind, Maud-Evelyn has been resurrected—she is everyone’s Maud-Evelyn, a subject upon which they could project the gaze of innocence, youth, femininity, and vitality.

I wrote an essay on this text titled Maud-Evelyn: The Instance of Collective Resurrection and Love as a Twisted Curse. I coined the term “collective resurrection” myself, and by the time I invented this term, I had formed in my mind a new story about Kevin’s resurrection. After all, one does not return to their current life after death. Even in Leo Tolstoy’s Resurrection, resurrection does not happen physically. The only viable means of making it happen is through what I call the Maud-Evelyn way: that is, through having people believe that someone is resurrected. Hence the establishment of a religion with faith in the “Companion” who was resurrected; at least, that is what Bruce claims, but people need to believe him because he is the only one who possesses the elixir that saves them. In other words, he is the actual savior.

See, when you are in power and needed, you can say just about anything you want, and people will believe you. That is the power of language combined with authority.

The second half of that title is “love as a twisted curse.” In Maud-Evelyn, the resolution of the story stays at a stage of stagnation. On a public level, nothing changes after people embrace her resurrection and are then told she has been dead for several years. It only affects people who care about her and love her. The Dedricks, her parents, having fulfilled their wish of setting up, in other people’s minds, the fictitious figure of an animated version of their daughter, pass away peacefully; Marmaduke follows, dying as a young man, though the story does not explain the cause. Although it is not agreed upon nor approved by the instructor of that English class, I believe it is their overwhelming obsession with the dead that leads to their demise. This propels me to understand the nature of the Maud-Evelyn kind of resurrection as not being part of a good-or-bad dichotomy, but certainly possessing a manipulative essence. In Mr. Lazarus the Obscure, Bruce starts his religion to have people believe in the plausibility of resurrection. The further logic is to project the “Companion” as a miraculous figure in order to manipulate the crowd into believing him. Without doubt, Bruce in the story loves Kevin and could not love him more. But the obsession with making everyone else believe that he is back through control is nonetheless an exemplification of a false love.

With all these elements blended in my mind, I made my first workshop story a science fiction. I have to admit it is not perfect; the story is incredibly fragmented. The prototypical idea of the first half and the second half of the plot is self-contradictory, and I was forced to make them coexist through cliché explanations such as time travel. I did not like the Grimoire at all. I did all I could to avoid it, but it is still there in the published story. The fallacy is that I found no better replacement for it. I thought to myself that if I were any better, I would have made the story a fiction, not a sci-fi. I wanted to connect the past, future, and present, but not through the absurd introduction of a Grimoire that seems entirely out of place. Because of the Grimoire, I was forced to do a lot of telling over showing, something I particularly hate when assessing others’ writing, and I practiced it in bulk in my own writing. In crafting this piece, I discovered some limitations in my writing: first, when having to inform readers about a complicated context, I tend to resort to telling and fantasizing; second, I included way too much first-person philosophical introspection, as well as grandiose terms that people seem confused by. This offers me a direction to work toward: a third-person story emphasizing more of what is going on externally over internally; a simple story that people understand; a story featuring realism and adding no unnecessary science elements—things I am not fully confident in explaining well. Quantum physics should be left to the professionals, probably not me.

Now, onto the second story. The context of this one is easier. I finished 1984, Brave New World, The Odyssey, and the Japanese anime Attack on Titan prior to starting this story. The fusion of them is The Boundless. I took Foucault’s concept of implied surveillance from his Panopticon thought experiment as the foundation of the story. It is adopted widely in 1984. This is basically the idea that people imprison themselves due to a lack of knowledge of their surroundings. This idea is seen in The Boundless when the salesclerk mentions that other people do not come to her; they fear the unknown consequences of doing so. I used the idea of Brave New World. The alternative world in my work is basically Brave New World but different in that it does not rank its residents; also, it is so dependent on the Old World, a place Brave New World has completely abandoned (the Preservation Zone, primitive and feared). The first part did not touch upon this. The second part of Story One in my trilogy will be about Karl’s life in the new world. So, it is interesting to make the claim here: it is not yet a dystopian story; it has not gotten to its dystopian part.

The Odyssey is another interesting element. I was reminded in the peer revision process of something I would never have thought of if working alone: How could a world have The Odyssey but not Prometheus? Questions like this are precisely what make peer revision important. I now have to think of a way to make the two coexist because I cannot discard The Odyssey. Karl’s life in the New World will be similar to Odysseus’s journey facing the Lotus Eaters and the Greek goddess Circe, a sorceress who turned men into beasts. This book, though of a different genre and a totally different narrative structure, remains one of my greatest inspirations in creating The Boundless.

The anime Attack on Titan is an interesting case. I know this is America and not a lot of people watch anime, but this show is absolutely goated. I grew up in China and lived in Japan sometimes; the influence of subculture there is profound to me. Attack on Titan talks about a limited world: people live inside the walls, fearing the Titans, wanderers of the outside. The story, as it develops, gradually reveals the truth about this world: from inside the walls, to between the walls, and to outside the walls. A famous moment in Attack on Titan is when the protagonist first arrives at the ocean, looking at what was only talked about by his father and something none of his people had ever seen. He said, “And on the other side of the ocean... is freedom. That’s what I always believed.” This line inspired me to create the father-and-son scene near the seashore. I cannot think of a more romantic, more agonizing farewell scene than this.

What I did better in the second story is that I finally did more showing than telling. I also made the fiction seem real, to an extent. From feedback provided by my peers in class, I interpret that they saw my work as an interesting story and would like to see more. I never feel destroyed when receiving comments on improvement; I almost always become incredibly happy if people like my work and want to see more of it. This is, to me, the greatest compliment and achievement; I received it in this semester’s creative writing class. It is my honor, honestly. It showed how much I have improved over the semester from storytelling to world-building, I improved in nearly all aspects. I did receive feedback about a messed-up sequence. I am glad to hear those different voices because I, too, was between decisions and went with the one that not everyone would prefer. It’s okay. My peers’ advice offers me a glimpse into the expectations in the eyes of others. I will therefore have the chance to improve. Without them, it would not have been possible.
